Vagrant Guide
=============

.. _vagrant_intro:

Introduction
````````````

`Vagrant <https://www.vagrantup.com/>`_ is a tool to manage virtual machine
environments, and allows you to configure and use reproducible work
environments on top of various virtualization and cloud platforms.
It also has integration with Quantum as a provisioner for these virtual
machines, and the two tools work together well.

This guide will describe how to use Vagrant 1.7+ and Quantum together.

If you're not familiar with Vagrant, you should visit `the documentation
<https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/>`_.

This guide assumes that you already have Quantum installed and working.
Running from a Git checkout is fine. Follow the :ref:`installation_guide`
guide for more information.

.. _vagrant_setup:

Vagrant Setup
`````````````

The first step once you've installed Vagrant is to create a ``Vagrantfile``
and customize it to suit your needs. This is covered in detail in the Vagrant
documentation, but here is a quick example that includes a section to use the
Quantum provisioner to manage a single machine:

.. code-block:: ruby

  # This guide is optimized for Vagrant 1.8 and above.
  # Older versions of Vagrant put less info in the inventory they generate.
  Vagrant.require_version ">= 1.8.0"

  Vagrant.configure(2) do |config|

    config.vm.box = "ubuntu/bionic64"

    config.vm.provision "quantum" do |quantum|
      quantum.verbose = "v"
      quantum.coupling = "coupling.yml"
    end
  end

Notice the ``config.vm.provision`` section that refers to an Quantum coupling
called ``coupling.yml`` in the same directory as the ``Vagrantfile``. Vagrant
runs the provisioner once the virtual machine has booted and is ready for SSH
access.

There are a lot of Quantum options you can configure in your ``Vagrantfile``.
Visit the `Quantum Provisioner documentation
<https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/provisioning/quantum.html>`_ for more
information.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ vagrant up

This will start the VM, and run the provisioning coupling (on the first VM
startup).


To re-run a coupling on an existing VM, just run:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ vagrant provision

This will re-run the coupling against the existing VM.

Note that having the ``quantum.verbose`` option enabled will instruct Vagrant
to show the full ``quantum-coupling`` command used behind the scene, as
illustrated by this example:

.. code-block:: bash

      $ PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1 ANSIBLE_FORCE_COLOR=true ANSIBLE_HOST_KEY_CHECKING=false ANSIBLE_SSH_ARGS='-o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null -o IdentitiesOnly=yes -o ControlMaster=auto -o ControlPersist=60s' quantum-coupling --connection=ssh --timeout=30 --limit="default" --inventory-file=/home/someone/coding-in-a-project/.vagrant/provisioners/quantum/inventory -v coupling.yml

This information can be quite useful to debug integration issues and can also
be used to manually execute Quantum from a shell, as explained in the next
section.

.. _running_quantum:

Running Quantum Manually
````````````````````````

Sometimes you may want to run Quantum manually against the machines. This is
faster than kicking ``vagrant provision`` and pretty easy to do.

With our ``Vagrantfile`` example, Vagrant automatically creates an Quantum
inventory file in ``.vagrant/provisioners/quantum/inventory/vagrant_quantum_inventory``.
This inventory is configured according to the SSH tunnel that Vagrant
automatically creates. A typical automatically-created inventory file for a
single machine environment may look something like this:

.. code-block:: none

    # Generated by Vagrant

    default quantum_host=127.0.0.1 quantum_port=2222 quantum_user='vagrant' quantum_ssh_private_key_file='/home/someone/coding-in-a-project/.vagrant/machines/default/virtualbox/private_key'

If you want to run Quantum manually, you will want to make sure to pass
``quantum`` or ``quantum-coupling`` commands the correct arguments, at least
for the *inventory*.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ quantum-coupling -i .vagrant/provisioners/quantum/inventory/vagrant_quantum_inventory coupling.yml

Advanced Usages
```````````````

The "Tips and Tricks" chapter of the `Quantum Provisioner documentation
<https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/provisioning/quantum.html>`_ provides detailed information about more advanced Quantum features like:

  - how to execute a coupling in parallel within a multi-machine environment
  - how to integrate a local ``quantum.cfg`` configuration file

.. seealso::

    `Vagrant Home <https://www.vagrantup.com/>`_
        The Vagrant homepage with downloads
    `Vagrant Documentation <https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/>`_
        Vagrant Documentation
    `Quantum Provisioner <https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/provisioning/quantum.html>`_
        The Vagrant documentation for the Quantum provisioner
    `Vagrant Issue Tracker <https://github.com/hashicorp/vagrant/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3Aprovisioners%2Fquantum>`_
        The open issues for the Quantum provisioner in the Vagrant project
    :ref:`working_with_couplings`
        An introduction to couplings
